=head1 NAME

runz80 - Run program for the Z80 processor

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over 4

=item B<runz80> [B<--raw>|B<--cpm>|B<--zx>] [<I<program.bin>>]

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<runz80> is a very rudimentary Z80 system emulator. It serves as an
example and testbed for I<libz80cpu>. Its capabilities are limited to loading
serial I/O, terminating itself and leaving an execution trace log.
UART is emulated to provide basic serial I/O.

Minimal support is provided for CP/M or ZX Spectrum programs in order to
provide serial I/O using standard ROM calls.

Emulation stops upon encountering a I<halt> instruction or error.

Verbose output is controlled with I<DEBUG_Z80> and I<DEBUG_IO>
environment variables.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--raw>

Treat the image as a raw program. Load the program at 0xf000, with a copy
at 0x0000 (for Altos IOP compatibility). No ROM call emulation is attempted.

=item B<--cpm>

Treat the image as a CP/M program. Map minimal BIOS at 0x0000 and load the
program at 0x0100.

The minimal BIOS implements system calls 2 and 9. It's just enough to be
able to run YAZE test programs.

=item B<--zx>

Treat the image as a binary intended to run on ZX Spectrum. The program is
loaded at 0x8000, stack initialized in a way that a I<ret> terminates the
program and I<rst 10> provides formatted console output. Nothing more.

This is just good enough to run z80test.

=back

Without any option, the program type is guessed. Files whose names end
with I<.com> or I<.out> are assumed to be CP/M or XZ spectrum programs
respectively. Everything else is treated as raw.

=head1 MEMORY MAP

=over

=item 0x0000

COM programs terminate by jumping here. There's a HALT instruction here.

Raw programs are copied here too, for Altos 586 IOP compatibility.
The IOP has a 8K ROM mapped at this address.

=item 0x0005

COM programs have a BDOS system call handler for console I/O here.

=item 0x0100

COM programs are loaded here.

=item 0x8000

ZX Spectrum programs are loaded here.

=item 0xf000

Raw programs are loaded here (and also copied to 0x0000).

Good for I<Z80SerialMonitor> built with I<CONSTANTS-F000-E0.asm> configuration.

=back

=head1 I/O MAP

=over

=item 0x20 -- 0x24

CTC timer. Present at this address on Altos 586 IOP, all I/O ignored.


=item 0x2c -- 0x2d

SIO serial port. Present at this address on Altos 586 IOP.


=item 0xe0 -- 0xe3

DART serial port.

Good for I<Z80SerialMonitor> built with I<CONSTANTS-F000-E0.asm> configuration.

=back

=head1 BUGS

Some instructions are probably wrong.

Interrupts are not implemented.

No R800 or 8080 support.

It is slow and ugly, just like you.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item I<DEBUG_Z80>

Causes execution trace to be sent to stderr when set to any value.

=item I<DEBUG_IO>

Causes I/O trace to be writen to stderr when set to any value.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

=over

=item C<< runz80 Z80SerialMonitor/Z80Monitor.bin >>

Run the serial monitor.

=item C<< DEBUG_Z80=1 runz80 yaze/test/prelim.com 2>exec.log >>

Run the quick test suite, preserve the execution trace.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over

=item L<https://github.com/electrickery/Z80SerialMonitor>

A lovely Z80 serial monitor that works with this emulator.

=item L<https://github.com/begoon/yaze>

Another Z80 emulator. Faster, nicer, actually correct. Contains a test suite
that can be run with this emulator.

=item L<https://github.com/raxoft/z80test>

A nice set of tests, intended to run on ZX Spectrum.

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

=over

=item * Lubomir Rintel <L<lkundrak@v3.sk>>

=back

Nobody else helped me.

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 2 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

The source code repository can be obtained from
L<https://github.com/lkundrak/libz80cpu>. Bug fixes and feature
ehancements licensed under same conditions as libz80cpu are welcome
via GIT pull requests.
